README.md, before:

# postgres-replicant

A PostgreSQL streaming logical replication client for Haskell.

This library is currently _EXPERIMENTAL_ and is not ready for
production yet.  Developers are encouraged to test out the library,
add issues, contribute and make it awesome.

React to database changes in real-time.  Enrich data, send
notifications, monitor suspicious activity, etc.

## Setup

In order to use a logical replication client you need to set the
`wal_level` in Postgres to `logical`.  You can set that, for example,
in your `postgres.conf` file:

  wal_level = logical

There is a known issue in the experimental release where the
`wal_sender` process, if it has a timeout set, will time out a
replicant client.  This will be fixed in a future release.  Unless
you're trying to fix it, you can turn it off by setting:

  wal_sender_timeout = 0

Then restart your server, log in as `postgres` or another super user
and check:

  SHOW wal_level

It should show _logical_.

You will also need a user who is
[allowed](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/9.1/sql-alterrole.html
"PostgreSQL user role documentation") to use replication features.

Then add a database and your user with the `REPLICATION` trait to the
database, grant all on it if you need to, etc.

We haven't added authorization support yet to the library so make sure
in `pg_hba.conf` you `trust` local connections:

    host    all             all             127.0.0.1/32            trust

Caveat emptor.

You will also need to install the `wal2json` plugin for your
PostgreSQL server.  For example in Ubuntu-like distributions you can
just:

    $ sudo apt install postgresql-12-wal2json

Assuming you have installed PostgreSQL from the package repositories.

You can then setup a basic "hello world" program using this library:

``` haskell
module Main where

import Control.Exception

import Database.PostgreSQL.Replicant

main :: IO ()
main = do
  let settings = PgSettings "my-user" "my-database" "localhost" "5432" "testing"
  withLogicalStream settings $ \change -> do
    print change
      `catch` \err ->
      print err
```

Which should connect, create a `testing` replication slot, and start
sending your callback the changes to your database as they arrive.

### WAL Output Plugins

Presently we only support the `wal2json` WAL output plugin and only
the v1 format.  Support for the v2 format is planned as are more
output plugins.

## FAQ

### Why not use LISTEN/NOTIFY

You don't have to set up triggers for each table with logical
replication.  You also don't have the message size limitation.  That
limitation often forces clients to perform a query for each message to
fetch the data.  We only use one connection.

Commit message:

Add environment lookup for configuration variables
The example program will look for values in:

  - PG_USER
  - PG_DATABASE
  - PG_HOST
  - PG_PORT
  - PG_SLOTNAME

And will use sensible defaults for them if not defined.

README.md, after:

# postgres-replicant

A PostgreSQL streaming logical replication client for Haskell.

This library is currently _EXPERIMENTAL_ and is not ready for
production yet.  Developers are encouraged to test out the library,
add issues, contribute and make it awesome.

React to database changes in real-time.  Enrich data, send
notifications, monitor suspicious activity, etc.

## Setup

In order to use a logical replication client you need to set the
`wal_level` in Postgres to `logical`.  You can set that, for example,
in your `postgres.conf` file:

  wal_level = logical

There is a known issue in the experimental release where the
`wal_sender` process, if it has a timeout set, will time out a
replicant client.  This will be fixed in a future release.  Unless
you're trying to fix it, you can turn it off by setting:

  wal_sender_timeout = 0

Then restart your server, log in as `postgres` or another super user
and check:

  SHOW wal_level

It should show _logical_.

You will also need a user who is
[allowed](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/9.1/sql-alterrole.html
"PostgreSQL user role documentation") to use replication features.

Then add a database and your user with the `REPLICATION` trait to the
database, grant all on it if you need to, etc.

We haven't added authorization support yet to the library so make sure
in `pg_hba.conf` you `trust` local connections:

    host    all             all             127.0.0.1/32            trust

Caveat emptor.

You will also need to install the `wal2json` plugin for your
PostgreSQL server.  For example in Ubuntu-like distributions you can
just:

    $ sudo apt install postgresql-12-wal2json

Assuming you have installed PostgreSQL from the package repositories.

You can then setup a basic "hello world" program using this library:

``` haskell
module Main where

import Control.Exception

import Database.PostgreSQL.Replicant

main :: IO ()
main = do
  let settings = PgSettings "my-user" "my-database" "localhost" "5432" "testing"
  withLogicalStream settings $ \change -> do
    print change
      `catch` \err ->
      print err
```

Which should connect, create a `testing` replication slot, and start
sending your callback the changes to your database as they arrive.

### WAL Output Plugins

Presently we only support the `wal2json` WAL output plugin and only
the v1 format.  Support for the v2 format is planned as are more
output plugins.

## Example Program

Included is a simple program, `replicant-example` which should help
you test your connection settings and make sure that you can connect
and receive WAL changes.

You can change the connection settings through environment variables:

    PG_USER=myuser PG_DATABASE=mydb replicant-example

The configuration settings are:

- `PG_USER`: The replication user to connect as
- `PG_DATABASE`: The database to connect to
- `PG_HOST`: The host name of the database to connect to
- `PG_PORT`: The port to connect on
- `PG_SLOTNAME`: The replication slot to create or connect to

## FAQ

### Why not use LISTEN/NOTIFY

You don't have to set up triggers for each table with logical
replication.  You also don't have the message size limitation.  That
limitation often forces clients to perform a query for each message to
fetch the data.  We only use one connection.
